API Reference Docs for Interactivity API (#52948)
WordPress/gutenberg: packages/interactivity/docs/2-api-reference.md

# API Reference

To add interactivity to blocks using the Interactivity API, developers can use:

- **Directives** - added to the markup to add specific behavior to the DOM elements of block.
- **Store** - that contains the logic and data (state, actions, or effects among others) needed for the behaviour.

DOM elements are connected to data stored in the state & context through directives. If data in the state or context change, directives will react to those changes updating the DOM accordingly (see [diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#room=11c461f5e18480cd8631,mNsrOHbcUKgVdITiRl6H5w)).

![State & Directives](assets/state-directives.png)

## The directives

> Directives are custom attributes that are added to the markup of your block to add behaviour to its DOM elements. This can be done in the `render.php` file (for dynamic blocks) or the `save.js` file (for static blocks).

Reviewer: Maybe we can mention here that they can also be injected dynamically using the HTML Tag Processor.

Author: Added! 👍

Interactivity API directives use the `data-` prefix.

_Example of directives used in the HTML markup_

```html
<div
  data-wp-context='{ "isOpen": false }'
  data-wp-effect="effects.logIsOpen"
>
  <button
    data-wp-on--click="actions.toggle"
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.isOpen"
    aria-controls="p-1"
  >
    Toggle
  </button>
 
  <p id="p-1" data-wp-show="context.isOpen">
    This element is now visible!

>   </p>

Reviewer: We should replace `data-wp-show` examples with `data-wp-bind--hidden` for own as `data-wp-show` will probably won't make it to the first version of the Interactivity API.

```suggestion
  <p id="p-1" data-wp-bind--hidden="!context.isOpen">
    This element is now visible!
  </p>
```

</div>
```

### List of Directives

With directives we can manage directly in the DOM behavior related to things such as: Side Effects, State, Event Handlers, Attributes, Display, Template Logic, Content or Errors

#### `wp-effect` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/SIDE_EFFECTS-207399.svg)

> It runs an expression **when the node is created and runs it again when the state or context changes**. You can call several effects (or inits) from the same DOM by using the syntax`data-effect--[unique-id]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It runs a callback **when the node is created and runs it again when the state or context changes**. You can attach several effects to the same DOM element by using the syntax `data-wp-effect--[unique-id]`.
```

_Example of `wp-effect` directive_
```html
<form 
  data-wp-effect="effect.myNamespace.logTime" 
>
  <input type="text" id="password" name="access-password">
</form>
```

_Example of several `wp-effect` directives on the same DOM element_
```html
<form 
  data-wp-effect–-1="effect.myNamespace.logTime" 
  data-wp-effect–-2="effect.myNamespace.focusFirstElement"
>
  <input type="text" id="password" name="access-password">
</form>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

> <pre><code>

Reviewer: Is there any reason to use `<pre><code>` instead of markdown's ```js?

Author: It's the only way I found to add a `details` behavior in GitHub's markdown (I want to "hide" the store examples but let them available as they're useful to understand the directives behaviour).
But I'm going to remove these details "sections" so we can check which option is better

Reviewer: I think the details are fine. I meant using markdown's ```js instead of `<pre><code>` so GitHub's code highlighter works. 

Like this (but without the initial `\` in the ```js):

```md
<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

\```js
// store
store({
  effects: {
    myNamespace: {
      logTime: () => console.log(new Date()),
      focusFirstElement: ({ref}) => ref.querySelector('input:first-child').focus();
    },
  }
});
\```
</details>
```

Full example here: https://gist.github.com/luisherranz/0a065f2862596903bbef0c7d56428662

Author: Thanks! I tried this but it wasn't working for me.
With this reference, I will add these code blocks in this way

// store
store({
  effects: {
    myNamespace: {
      logTime: () => console.log(new Date()),

>       focusFirstElement: ({ref}) => ref.querySelector('input:first-child').focus();

Reviewer: These callbacks do not depend on `state` or `context`, so they will never be called again. So they are basically like `wp-init` in this case and therefore they may not be the best examples to show how `wp-effect` works.

---

Also, do we need to use WordPress Coding Standards? Like:

```suggestion
      logTime: () => console.log( new Date() ),
      focusFirstElement: ( { ref } ) => ref.querySelector( 'input:first-child' ).focus();
```

    },
  }
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

> Typical use cases for this directive are: showing a console.log, change the title of the page or usability behaviours using `.ref()` `.focus()`

Reviewer: Is `.ref()` a typo?

```suggestion
Typical use cases for this directive are: showing a console.log, changing the title of the page or usability behaviors, like using `ref.focus()`
```

#### `wp-init` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/SIDE_EFFECTS-207399.svg)

Like `wp-effect` but it runs an expression **only when the node is created**.

_Example of `data-wp-init` directive_ 
```html

> <div data-wp-init="effect.myNamespace.logTimeInit">

Reviewer: Should we use `init` for init callbacks in the store instead of `effects`? 

I've never really been sure, to be honest. What do you think? 😄

```suggestion
<div data-wp-init="init.myNamespace.logTimeInit">
```

Author: Not sure either. For now, I would keep things simple in the examples by just having an `effects` object. 
We could comment on that in the docs as a note aside in the `wp-init` section.

Reviewer: Ok 🙂

  <p>Hi!</>
</div>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  effects: {
    myNamespace: {
      logTimeInit: () => console.log( `Init at `+ new Date()),
    },
  }
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

#### `wp-on` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/EVENT_HANDLERS-207399.svg)

It runs code on dispatched DOM events like `click` or `keyup`. The format of this directive is `data-wp-on--[event]`, like `data-wp-on--click` or `data-wp-on--keyup`.

> _Example of `wp-context` directive_ 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Example of `wp-on` directive_ 
```

```php

> <button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace logTime" >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.logTime" >
```

  Click Me!
</button>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {
      logTime: () => console.log(new Date())
    },
  },
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

> #### `wp-context` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/STATE-207399.svg)

Reviewer: Maybe we could also show how different contexts are merged together?

```html
<div data-wp-context="{ foo: 'bar' }">
  <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bar" --></span>

  <div data-wp-context="{ bar: 'baz' }">
    <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bar" --></span>

    <div data-wp-context="{ foo: 'bob' }">
      <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bob" --></span>
    </div>

  </div>
</div>
```

It provides **local** state available to a specific HTML node and its children.

_Example of `wp-context` directive_ 
```php
//render.php
<div data-wp-context='{ "post": { "id": <?php echo $post->ID; ?> } }' >
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.logId" >
    Click Me!
  </button>
</div>
>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {
      logId: ({ context }) => {
        console.log(context.post.id);
      },
    },
  },
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

#### `wp-class` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/ATTRIBUTES-207399.svg)

It adds or removes a class to an HTML element, depending on a boolean value.

_Example of `wp-class` directive_ 
```php
<div data-wp-context='{ "hidden": true }' >

>   <button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggleTextVisibility" >Show Text</button>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggleTextVisibility">Show Text</button>
```

  <p data-wp-class--hidden="selectors.myNamespace.isTextHidden">Hello World!</p>
</div>
>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {

>       toggleTextVisibility: ({ context }) => !context.hidden ,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      toggleTextVisibility: ({ context }) => {
        context.hidden = !context.hidden;
      },
```

    },
  },
  selectors: {
    myNamespace: {

>       isTextHidden: ({ context }) => context.hidden ,

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it makes sense to introduce here a selector that is basically useless as it returns the same value that is stored in the context (and not a value _derived_ from it). Maybe it's confusing.

Author: You're right! I'll look for a better example.

    },
  },
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

#### `wp-style` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/ATTRIBUTES-207399.svg)

It adds or removes inline style to an HTML element, depending on its value.

_Example of `wp-style` directive_ 
```html
<div data-wp-context='{ "color": "red" }' >
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggleContextColor">Toggle Color Text</button>
  <p data-wp-style--color="context.color"">Hello World!</p>
</div>
>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {
      toggleContextColor: ( { context } ) => {
        context.color = context.color === "red" ? "blue" : "red";
      }
    },
  }
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

> #### `wp-show` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/DISPLAY-207399.svg)

Reviewer: Yeah, totally my fault but we should remove this, sorry.

Author: Removed all references to `wp-show`

Reviewer: Thanks!

It shows and hides elements depending on the state or context.

```html
<li
  data-wp-context='{"isMenuOpen": false }'>
  <button
    data-wp-on.click="actions.myNamespace.toggleMenu"
  >
  </button>
  <div data-wp-show="context.isMenuOpen">
    <span>Title</span>
    <ul>
      SUBMENU ITEMS
    </ul>
  </div>
</li>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {
      toggleMenu: ( { context } ) => !context.isMenuOpen
    },
  }
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

#### `wp-bind` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/ATTRIBUTES-207399.svg)

> It allows setting HTML attributes on elements based on a boolean value.

Reviewer: `wp-bind` accepts strings as well (explained above).

```html
<li
  data-wp-context='{"isMenuOpen": false }'>
  <button
    data-wp-on.click="actions.myNamespace.toggleMenu"

>     data-wp-bind.aria-expanded="context.isMenuOpen"

Reviewer: Be aware that the `.` notation was deprecated in favor or `--`. We used it for a while, so there may be outdated examples out there.

```suggestion
    data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggleMenu"
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.isMenuOpen"
```

Author: Fixed!

  >
  </button>

>   <div data-wp-show="context.isMenuOpen">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <div data-wp-bind--hidden="!context.isMenuOpen">
```

    <span>Title</span>
    <ul>
      SUBMENU ITEMS
    </ul>
  </div>
</li>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>
<pre><code>
// store
store({
  actions: {
    myNamespace: {

>       toggleMenu: ( { context } ) => !context.isMenuOpen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      toggleMenu: ( { context } ) => {
        context.isMenuOpen = !context.isMenuOpen;
      },
```

    },
  }
});
</code></pre>
</details>
<br/>

#### `wp-each` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/TEMPLATE_LOGIC-207399.svg)

It creates DOM elements by iterating through a list.

#### `wp-slot / wp-fill` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/TEMPLATE_LOGIC-207399.svg)

It moves snippets of HTML from one place (fills) to another (slots).

#### `wp-text` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/CONTENT-207399.svg)

It sets the inner content of an HTML element.

```html
<div data-wp-context='{ "text": "Text 1" }'>
  <span
    data-wp-text="context.text"
  ></span>
  <button

>     data-wp-on--click="actions.toggleContextText"

Reviewer: I've seen that sometimes you use a namespace and sometimes you don't. I'm not particularly in favor of any, but I think we should be consistent across the documentation to avoid confusion.

```suggestion
    data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggleContextText"
```

It sets the innerHTML property of an HTML element.

#### `wp-error` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/ERROR-207399.svg)

It captures errors in other interactive blocks.

### Values of directives are references to properties

The value assigned to a directive is a string pointing to a specific state, selector, action, or effect. *Using a Namespace is highly recommended* to define these elements of the store. 

In the following example we use the namespace `wpmovies` (plugin name is usually a good namespace name) to define the `isPlaying` selector
```js
store({
  selectors: {
    wpmovies: {
      isPlaying: ({ state }) => state.wpmovies.currentVideo !== '',
    },
  }
});
```

And then, we use the string value `"selectors.wpmovies.isPlaying"` to assign the result of this selector to the `data-wp-show`

```php
<div data-wp-show="selectors.wpmovies.isPlaying" ... >
  <iframe ...></iframe>
</div>
```

These values assigned to directives are **references** to a particular property in the store. They are wired to the directives automatically so that each directive “knows” what store element (action, effect...) refers to without any additional configuration.

## The store

> The store is used to create the logic (actions and effects) called by the directives and the data used this logic.

Reviewer: Maybe divide it like this? I don't know…

```suggestion
The store is used to create the logic (actions, effects…) linked to the directives and the data used inside that logic (state, selectors…).
```

> **The store is usually created in the `view.js` file of each block**, although it can be initialized from the `render.php` of the block (see [diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#room=11c461f5e18480cd8631,mNsrOHbcUKgVdITiRl6H5w))

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure, but I think Excalidraw rooms expire after a certain time...

            // `{ "theme": false }`
            console.log(context);
            // `{ "isOpen": true }`
            console.log(ref);
            // The DOM element
            console.log(event);
            // The Event object if using the `data-wp-on`
            console.log(className);
            // The class name if using the `data-wp-class`
        }
    }
})
```

This approach enables some functionalities that make directives flexible and powerful:

- Actions and effects can read and modify the state and the context.
- Actions and state in blocks can be accessed by other blocks:
- Actions and effects can do anything a regular JavaScript function can do, like access the DOM or make API requests.
- Effects automatically react to state changes.

### Setting the store

#### On the client side

*In the `view.js` file of each block* we can define both the state and the elements of the store referencing functions like actions, effects or selectors.

`store` method used to set the store in javascript can be imported from `@wordpress/interactivity`  

```js
// store
import { store } from "@wordpress/interactivity"

store({
  state: {
    isVisible: false,

>   }

Reviewer: Are you not using `myNamespace` here for something in particular?

  actions: {
    myNamespace: {
      toggleVisibility: ({ state }) => !state.isVisible ,
    },
  },
  selectors: {
    myNamespace: {
      isHidden: ({ state }) => state.isVisible === false,
    },
  },
});
```

#### On the server side

The store can also be initialized on the server using the `wp_store()` function. You would typically do this in the `render.php` file of your block (the `render.php` templates were [introduced](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2022/10/12/block-api-changes-in-wordpress-6-1/) in WordPress 6.1). 

The store defined on the server with `wp_store()` gets merged with the stores defined in the view.js files.

The `wp_store` function receives an [associative array](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.array.php) as a parameter. 

_Example of store initialized from the server with a `state` = `{ someValue: 123 }`_

```php
// render.php
wp_store( array(
  'state' => array(

>     'myPlugin' => array(

Reviewer: Maybe we should keep using `myNamespace` here for consistency?

```suggestion
    'myNamespace' => array(
```

  data-wp-effect="effects.myNamespace.logIsOpen"
>
  <button
    data-wp-on--click="actions.myNamespace.toggle"
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.myNamespace.isOpen"
    aria-controls="p-1"
  >
    Toggle
  </button>
 
  <p id="p-1" data-bind--hidden="!context.myNamespace.isOpen">
    This element is now visible!
  </p>
</div>
```

> **Note**
> The use of Namespaces to define the context, state or any other elements of the store is highly recommended to avoid possible collision with other elements with the same name. In the following examples we have not use namespaces for the sake of simplicity

Directives can also be injected dynamically using the [HTML Tag Processor](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2023/03/07/introducing-the-html-api-in-wordpress-6-2).

### List of Directives

With directives we can manage directly in the DOM behavior related to things such as: Side Effects, State, Event Handlers, Attributes, Display, Template Logic, Content or Errors

#### `wp-interactive` ![](https://img.shields.io/badge/DECLARATIVE-207399.svg)

The `wp-interactive` "activates" hydration for the DOM element and its children through the Interactivity API (directives and store). 

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can add an example?

Also, maybe we should stick to "interactive" and "interactivity" and avoid the use of _hydration_, which is a more technical term?

```suggestion
The `wp-interactive` directive "activates" the interactivity for the DOM element and its children through the Interactivity API (directives and store). 

\```html
<!-- Let's make this element and its children interactive -->
<div data-wp-interactive>
  I'm interactive now, and I can use directives!
  <span>
    I'm also interactive, and I can also use directives!
  </span>
</div>
\```
```

> **Note**

> > The use of `wp-interactive` is a requirement for the Interactivity API "engine" to work. In the following examples the `wp-interactive` has not been added for the sake of simplicity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The use of `wp-interactive` is a requirement for the Interactivity API "engine" to work. In the following examples the `data-wp-interactive` directive has not been added for the sake of simplicity.
```

# API Reference

To add interactivity to blocks using the Interactivity API, developers can use:

- **Directives** - added to the markup to add specific behavior to the DOM elements of block.
- **Store** - that contains the logic and data (state, actions, or effects among others) needed for the behaviour.

> DOM elements are connected to data stored in the state & context through directives. If data in the state or context change, directives will react to those changes updating the DOM accordingly (see [diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=rEg5d71O_jy3NrgYJUIVd,yjOUmMvxzNf6alqFjElvIw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DOM elements are connected to data stored in the state & context through directives. If data in the state or context change, directives will react to those changes updating the DOM accordingly (see [diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=rEg5d71O_jy3NrgYJUIVd,yjOUmMvxzNf6alqFjElvIw)).
```

  </p>
</div>
```

> **Note**
> The use of Namespaces to define the context, state or any other elements of the store is highly recommended to avoid possible collision with other elements with the same name. In the following examples we have not used namespaces for the sake of simplicity.

Directives can also be injected dynamically using the [HTML Tag Processor](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2023/03/07/introducing-the-html-api-in-wordpress-6-2).

### List of Directives

With directives we can manage directly in the DOM behavior related to things such as side effects, state, event handlers, attributes or content.

#### `wp-interactive` 

The `wp-interactive` "activates" hydration for the DOM element and its children through the Interactivity API (directives and store). 

> **Note**
> The use of `wp-interactive` is a requirement for the Interactivity API "engine" to work. In the following examples the `wp-interactive` has not been added for the sake of simplicity.

#### `wp-context` 

It provides **local** state available to a specific HTML node and its children.

The `wp-context` directive accepts a stringified JSON as value.

_Example of `wp-context` directive_ 
```php

> //render.php

Reviewer: Maybe this is not needed/useful? This HTML could also be the HTML returned by a `save.js` file.

```suggestion
```

Author: Because of the line `<div data-wp-context='{ {"post": { "id": <?php echo $post->ID; ?> } } ' >` wouldn't this code just be possible to be ran from `render.php`?

Reviewer: Ohhh, you're right 😅

<div data-wp-context='{ {"post": { "id": <?php echo $post->ID; ?> } } ' >
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.logId" >
    Click Me!
  </button>
</div>

> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  actions: {
    logId: ( { context } ) => {
      console.log( context.post.id );
    },
  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

Different contexts can be defined at different levels and deeper levels will merge their own context with any parent one:

```html
<div data-wp-context="{ foo: 'bar' }">
  <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bar" --></span>

  <div data-wp-context="{ bar: 'baz' }">
    <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bar" --></span>

    <div data-wp-context="{ foo: 'bob' }">
      <span data-wp-text="context.foo"><!-- Will output: "bob" --></span>
    </div>

  </div>
</div>
```

#### `wp-bind` 

It allows setting HTML attributes on elements based on a boolean or string value.

> This directive follows the syntax `data-wp-bind--attribute`.

_Example of `wp-bind` directive_ 
```html
<li data-wp-context='{ "isMenuOpen": false }'>
  <button
    data-wp-on--click="actions.toggleMenu"

>     data-wp-bind.aria-expanded="context.isMenuOpen"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    data-wp-bind--aria-expanded="context.isMenuOpen"
```

  >

>   </button>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  >
    Toggle
  </button>
```

  <div data-wp-bind--hidden="!context.isMenuOpen">
    <span>Title</span>
    <ul>
      SUBMENU ITEMS
    </ul>
  </div>
</li>
```
<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
	actions: {

> 		toggleMenu: ( { context } ) => ! context.isMenuOpen,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		toggleMenu: ( { context } ) => {
      context.isMenuOpen = ! context.isMenuOpen;
    },
```

	},
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-bind` directive is executed:
  - when the element is created. 
  - each time there's a change on any of the properties of the `state` or `context` involved on getting the final value of the directive (inside the callback or the expression passed as reference).

The `wp-bind` will do different things over the DOM element is applied depending on its value:
  - If the value is `true`, the attribute is added: `<div attribute>`.
  - If the value is `false`, the attribute is removed: `<div>`.
  - If the value is a string, the attribute is added with its value assigned: `<div attribute="value"`.
  - If the attribute name starts with `aria-` or `data-` and the value is boolean (either `true` or `false`), the attribute is added to the DOM with the boolean value assigned as a string: `<div aria-attribute="true">`.

When `wp-bind` directive references a callback to get its final value: 
- The `wp-bind` directive will be executed each time there's a change on any of the properties of the `state` or `context` used inside this callback.
- The callback receives the attribute name: `attribute`.

> - The returned value in the callback function is used to change the value of the associated attribute.

Reviewer: Maybe it would be clearer to switch the order of these two paragraphs.

#### `wp-class` 

It adds or removes a class to an HTML element, depending on a boolean value.

> This directive follows the syntax `data-wp-class--classname`.

_Example of `wp-class` directive_ 
```php

> <div data-wp-interactive>

Reviewer: Not that it is wrong, but you say at the beginning that we are going to omit them from the examples.

```suggestion
<div>
```

    data-wp-class--selected="context.isSelected"
  >
    Option 1
  </li>
  <li 
    data-wp-context='{ "isSelected": false } '
    data-wp-on--click="actions.toggleSelection"
    data-wp-class--selected="context.isSelected"
  >
    Option 2
  </li>
</div>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  actions: {
    toggleSelection: ( { context } ) => {
      context.isSelected = !context.isSelected
    }
  }
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-class` directive is executed:
  - when the element is created.
  - each time there's a change on any of the properties of the `state` or `context` involved on getting the final value of the directive (inside the callback or the expression passed as reference).

When `wp-class` directive references a callback to get its final boolean value, the callback receives the class name: `className`.

The boolean value received by the directive is used to toggle (add when `true` or remove when `false`) the associated class name from the `class` attribute.

#### `wp-style` 

It adds or removes inline style to an HTML element, depending on its value.

> > This directive follows the syntax `data-wp-style--cssProperty`.

Reviewer: I'd use kebab-case here instead of camelCase to avoid confusion, because that's the way it works with CSS properties longer than one word: `data-wp-style--background-color` (not `data-wp-style--backgroundColor`).

```suggestion
> This directive follows the syntax `data-wp-style--css-property`.
```

_Example of `wp-style` directive_ 
```html
<div data-wp-context='{ "color": "red" }' >
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.toggleContextColor">Toggle Color Text</button>
  <p data-wp-style--color="context.color">Hello World!</p>
</div>
>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  actions: {
    toggleContextColor: ( { context } ) => {
      context.color = context.color === 'red' ? 'blue' : 'red';
    },
  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-style` directive is executed:
  - when the element is created.
  - each time there's a change on any of the properties of the `state` or `context` involved on getting the final value of the directive (inside the callback or the expression passed as reference).

When `wp-style` directive references a callback to get its final value, the callback receives the class style property: `cssProperty`.

The value received by the directive is used to add or remove the style attribute with the associated CSS property: :
  - If the value is `false`, the style attribute is removed: `<div>`.

>   - If the value is a string, the attribute is added with its value assigned: `<div style="cssProperty: value;">`.

Reviewer: Same here: (this is probably my fault)

```suggestion
  - If the value is a string, the attribute is added with its value assigned: `<div style="css-property: value;">`.
```

    },
  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-text` directive is executed:
  - when the element is created.
  - each time there's a change on any of the properties of the `state` or `context` involved on getting the final value of the directive (inside the callback or the expression passed as reference).

The returned value is used to change the inner content of the element: `<div>value</div>`.

#### `wp-on` 

It runs code on dispatched DOM events like `click` or `keyup`. 

> The syntax of this directive is `data-wp-on--[event]` (like `data-wp-on--click` or `data-wp-on--keyup`).

_Example of `wp-on` directive_ 
```php
<button data-wp-on--click="actions.logTime" >
  Click Me!
</button>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  actions: {
    logTime: () => console.log( new Date() ),
  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-on` directive is executed each time the associated event is triggered. 

The callback passed as reference receives [the event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Event) (`event`) and the returned value by this callback is ignored.

#### `wp-effect` 

> It runs a callback **when the node is created and runs it again when the state or context changes**. You can attach several effects to the same DOM element by using the syntax`data-wp-effect--[unique-id]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It runs a callback **when the node is created and runs it again when the state or context changes**. You can attach several effects to the same DOM element by using the syntax `data-wp-effect--[unique-id]`.  _The unique id doesn't need to be unique globally, it just needs to be different than the other unique ids of the `wp-effect` directives of that DOM element._
```

> _Example of `wp-on` directive_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Example of `wp-effect` directive_
```

```html
<div 
  data-wp-context='{ "counter": 0 }'
  data-wp-effect="effects.logCounter"
>
  <p>Counter: <span data-wp-text="context.counter"></span></p>
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.increaseCounter">+</button>
  <button data-wp-on--click="actions.decreaseCounter">-</button>
</div>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  actions: {
    increaseCounter: ({ context }) => {
      context.counter++;
    },
    decreaseCounter: ({ context }) => {	
      context.counter--;
    },
  }
  effects: {

>     logCounter: ({ context }) => console.log("Counter is " + context.myNamespace.counter + " at " + new Date() ),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    logCounter: ({ context }) => console.log("Counter is " + context.counter + " at " + new Date() ),
```

  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-effect` directive is executed:
  - when the element is created.
  - each time that any of the properties of the `state` or `context` used inside the callback changes.

The `wp-effect` directive can return a function. If it does, the returned function is used as cleanup logic, i.e., it will run just before the callback runs again, and it will run again when the element is removed from the DOM.

> As a reference, some use cases for this directive may be: 
> - logging.
> - changing the title of the page.
> - setting the focus on an element with `.focus()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reference, some use cases for this directive may be: 
- logging.
- changing the title of the page.
- setting the focus on an element with `.focus()`.
- changing the state or context when certain conditions are met.
```

#### `wp-init` 

It runs a callback **only when the node is created**.

> You can attach several `wp-init` to the same DOM element by using the syntax`data-wp-init--[unique-id]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can attach several `wp-init` to the same DOM element by using the syntax `data-wp-init--[unique-id]`.  _The unique id doesn't need to be unique globally, it just needs to be different than the other unique ids of the `wp-init` directives of that DOM element._
```

_Example of `data-wp-init` directive_ 
```html

> <div data-wp-init="effect.logTimeInit">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div data-wp-init="effects.logTimeInit">
```

  <p>Hi!</>
</div>
```

_Example of several `wp-init` directives on the same DOM element_
```html
<form 
  data-wp-init--log="effect.logTimeInit" 

>   data-wp-init--focus="effect.focusFirstElement"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  data-wp-init--log="effects.logTimeInit" 
  data-wp-init--focus="effects.focusFirstElement"
```

>
  <input type="text">
</form>
```

<details>
  <summary><em>See store used with the directive above</em></summary>

```js
store( {
  effects: {
    logTimeInit: () => console.log( `Init at ` + new Date() ),
    focusFirstElement: ( { ref } ) =>
      ref.querySelector( 'input:first-child' ).focus(),
  },
} );
```

</details>
<br/>

The `wp-init` can return a function. If it does, the returned function will run when the element is removed from the DOM.

> ### Values of directives are references to properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Values of directives are references to store properties
```

The value assigned to a directive is a string pointing to a specific state, selector, action, or effect. *Using a Namespace is highly recommended* to define these elements of the store. 

In the following example we use the namespace `wpmovies` (plugin name is usually a good namespace name) to define the `isPlaying` selector.

```js
store( {
	selectors: {
		wpmovies: {
			isPlaying: ( { state } ) => state.wpmovies.currentVideo !== '',
		},
	},
} );
```

And then, we use the string value `"selectors.wpmovies.isPlaying"` to assign the result of this selector to `data-bind--hidden`.

```php
<div data-bind--hidden="!selectors.wpmovies.isPlaying" ... >
  <iframe ...></iframe>
</div>
```

These values assigned to directives are **references** to a particular property in the store. They are wired to the directives automatically so that each directive “knows” what store element (action, effect...) refers to without any additional configuration.

## The store

The store is used to create the logic (actions, effects…) linked to the directives and the data used inside that logic (state, selectors…).

> **The store is usually created in the `view.js` file of each block**, although it can be initialized from the `render.php` of the block (see [diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=FPTvzmKpyunGuFzWt5nzX,gs2vvsN0HEvnEHsQ9u1gPg)).

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure that this diagram adds any value here. It seems difficult to understand without more context.

Author: You're right! I'll remove it from now and may use it in another more advanced explanation somewhere else

The store contains the reactive state and the actions and effects that modify it.

### Elements of the store

#### State 

Defines data available to the HTML nodes of the page. It is important to differentiate between two ways to define the data:
  - **Global state**:  It is defined using the `store()` function, and the data is available to all the HTML nodes of the page.

>   - **Context/Local State**: It is defined using the `data-wp-context` directive in an HTML node, and the data is available to that HTML node and its children.

Reviewer: Maybe we can add examples.

```suggestion
  - **Global state**:  It is defined using the `store()` function, and the data is available to all the HTML nodes of the page. It can be accessed using the `state` property.
  - **Context/Local State**: It is defined using the `data-wp-context` directive in an HTML node, and the data is available to that HTML node and its children. It can be accessed using the `context` property.

\```html
<!-- Access global state -->
<span data-wp-text="state.someText"></span>

<!-- Access local state (context) -->
<span data-wp-text="context.someText"></span>
\```

\```js
store( {
  actions: {
    someAction: ({ state, context }) => {
      state.someText // Access or modify global state
      context.someText // Access or modify local state (context)
    },
  },
} )
\```
```

#### Actions 

Usually triggered by the `data-wp-on` directive (using event listeners) or other actions.

#### Effects 

Automatically react to state changes. Usually triggered by `data-wp-effect` or `data-wp-init` directives.

#### Selectors

> Also known as _derived state_, returns a computed version of the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also known as _derived state_, returns a computed version of the state. They can access both `state` and `context`.
```

```js
// view.js  
store( {
	state: {
		amount: 34,
		defaultCurrency: 'EUR',
		currencyExchange: {
			USD: 1.1,
			GBP: 0.85,
		},
	},
	selectors: {
		amountInUSD: ( { state } ) =>
			state.currencyExchange[ 'USD' ] * state.amount,
		amountInGBP: ( { state } ) =>
			state.currencyExchange[ 'GBP' ] * state.amount,
	},
} );
```

> ### Objects passed to callbacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Argument passed to callbacks
```

When a directive is evaluated, the reference callback receives an object with:

> - The **`store`** containing the `state`, `actions` and `effects`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **`store`** containing all the store properties, like `state`, `selectors`, `actions` or `effects`.
```
